The Aragon Network Agreement (#1)
aragon/network: agreement.md

# Aragon Network Agreement

## Section 0. Background

> The Aragon Network is a Decentralized Autonomous Organization that is building a dispute resolution protocol and other smart contract infrastructure.

Author: ```suggestion
The Aragon Network is a Decentralized Autonomous Organization that builds and maintains a dispute resolution protocol and other smart contract infrastructure.
```

The Aragon Network is governed by Aragon Network Token (ANT) holders, who supported the initial creation of the network and under this Agreement will continue to guide its evolution through established governance processes.

> This Agreement exists to enumerate the shared mission, principles, and governance guidelines that bind ANT holders in their collaborative effort to create value for the Aragon Network.

Reviewer: Simply "This Agreement describes the..." or "...specifies the..." or "...establishes the..."?

## Section 1. RFC 2119 compliance
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

> ## Section 2. Immutable guidelines

Author: Idea: A common discussion/debate around constitutional law is over how to interpret a constitution. There are "loose constructionists", "strict constructionists", "textualists", "originalists", etc. Should we create an immutable guideline saying explicitly how the Agreement should be interpreted, to remove this debate altogether (or at least to shift the debate to a more productive topic)?

> The guidelines in this section SHALL NOT be amended. If any other guidelines in this Agreement conflict with these immutable guidelines, the immutable guidelines SHALL take priority for enforcement purposes. These guidelines apply to all proposals submitted to the Aragon Network organization.

Reviewer: Two sets of guidelines are referenced here. To avoid confusion, I'd recommend not using "**These** guidelines..." Better to always distinguish explicitly between "Guidelines in this Agreement" (i.e. all guidelines) and "Guidelines in Section 2" or "Immutable guidelines"

> 1. Proposals MUST be governed by this Agreement, or a future version of this Agreement as modified within the bounds of the Agreement.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If a hostile majority wanted to circumvent the Agreement, they could uninstall the Agreements app.

Solution: Require that proposals be governed by an Agreement, making the un-installation of the Agreements app illegal.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to prevent a hostile majority from removing minority protection from the organization.

> 2. Disputes over a proposal relying on this Agreement MUST be resolved by Aragon Court.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If a hostile majority wanted to circumvent the Agreement, they could uninstall the Agreements app.

Solution: Require that proposals be governed by an Agreement, making the un-installation of the Agreements app illegal.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to ensure that proposal disputes can always be arbitrated by a neutral dispute resolution protocol, in this case Aragon Court.

> 3. Proposals MUST NOT disproportionately benefit a majority of ANT holders voting on a proposal over the minority.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: Majority tokenholders can expropriate wealth from the minority.

Solution: Ensure proposals cannot disproportionately benefit the majority tokenholders over the minority.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to protect minority tokenholders from a hostile/ self-interested majority.

Reviewer: Could "disproportionately benefit" become a matter of debate? Can we imagine scenarios where opinions differ on whether a particular proposal is "disproportionately beneficial" to the majority? Without concrete measurement/quantification, how would such a conflict get resolved? Aragon Court? If this is specifically about proposals to transfer financial assets from the minority to the majority, would it make sense to say it explicitly?

Author: > Could "disproportionately benefit" become a matter of debate? Can we imagine scenarios where opinions differ on whether a particular proposal is "disproportionately beneficial" to the majority? Without concrete measurement/quantification, how would such a conflict get resolved? Aragon Court?

Yes, per the guideline 2.2 (immediately preceding this one) all disputes under this Agreement are to be resolved in Aragon Court.

> If this is specifically about proposals to transfer financial assets from the minority to the majority, would it make sense to say it explicitly?

A 51% attacker might try to take over the network to expropriate wealth from the minority. They could also be after Aragon Court for various reasons: maybe they plan to attack an organization relying on Aragon Court, or maybe they have taken a large short position on ANJ and want to destroy confidence in the court. This guideline is worded the way it is to try and "ban" all possible types of proposals that could be put forward to disproportionately benefit the majority over the minority of voters, without needing to anticipate specific types of proposals attackers might come up with to weasel their way to success.

Reviewer: Understood. I realize that a decision mechanism must be implemented, that majority rule is the most obvious option, and that the resulting attack vectors must be addressed somehow. But what about proposals that "disproportionately benefit" a minority over the majority? I think even a cursory look at conventional politics shows that one cannot assume the majority will always vote in their own best interest; indeed, the majority often votes in the interest of an ideologically dominant minority. One might even say that political systems are typically "hacked" and "attacked" by well-organized minorities (elites), not majorities (often politically immobile, disorganized). Does it make sense to raise the following question: why try and ban all proposals that "disproportionately benefit" a majority over the minority, but not the other way around? I think this highlights the ambiguity of "disproportionately benefit" which, as I understand it, would have to be measured and determined by the Aragon Court case-by-case. Opening a can of worms here, for sure, so if the implications of this problem are too complex and impractical to be considered for the Agreement, the discussion can be moved to the Aragon Forum instead.

Author: Your points are well taken @mlphresearch! Thank you.

In the Aragon Network whitepaper this guideline was suggested:

> Proposals must be made in good faith with the intention to improve the Network's operational efficiency, quality, or breadth of service, and benefit all ANT holders **in equal measure**.

(emphasis mine)

Would something like this be more along the lines of the type of protection you're looking for?

Reviewer: I think so, yes, although "in equal measure" feels simultaneously very precise and difficult to determine. I definitely like "in good faith" and "with the intention to improve the Network"; I'm less sure whether a proposal can benefit everyone **in equal measure**. The "spirit of the Agreement" matters more here than precise measurement; "**disproportionately** benefit" is actually a pretty good way of putting it, but I think it should be phrased/applied more universally, i.e. not only as a safeguard against mob rule but as guidance/insurance for the long-term growth/health of the network and the community as a whole.

Reviewer 2: >I'm less sure whether a proposal can benefit everyone in equal measure.

Instead we can say that the proposal must not be zero-sum. It could benefit different ANT holders unequally but it must not harm anyone.

> 4. Proposals MUST NOT attempt to cast a vote using ANT held in the address of any versions of the Agent app installed on the Aragon Network organization, or using ANT held in any Network contract that fulfills similar functionality as the Agent app.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If the Aragon Network Agent contract controls a balance of ANT then this ANT could be used to vote on proposals.

Solution: Rather than worry about the incentives of giving ANT holders more voting power using the Aragon Network's ANT, we invalidate any proposals that the Aragon Network votes YES for.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to permanently avoid a situation where ANT holders are fighting for control over the voting power conferred by ANT held by the Aragon Network.

Reviewer: Clarifying question: what is the source of the ANT held in the Agent app? Is this ANT deposited/held by the various Aragon organizations/DAOs?

Author: Good question. It could come from anywhere but the main source I could see it coming from would be newly minted ANT that is not immediately spent. Another source could be ANT that was allocated for a particular purpose but was returned to the DAO for some reason (e.g. a milestone was not met on a grant, the grant recipient team disbanded, etc).

Reviewer: Ah... so this is more like a network treasury?

Author: Yes, the Agent is/ can be used as a replacement for the Vault app, and holds all of the ETH/ERC-20/ERC-721 tokens belonging to the Network.

> 4. Proposals MUST NOT attempt to cast a vote using ANT held in the address of any versions of the Agent app installed on the Aragon Network organization, or using ANT held in any Network contract that fulfills similar functionality as the Agent app.

Author: It should be noted that this clause can result in the Aragon Network being bricked if the Min. Approval requirement on the Voting app and AN Agent ANT balance are both so high that a "YES" vote from the AN Agent would be required to pass proposals.

Some possible solutions:
- Keep the Min. Approval threshold low,
- Do not let the AN Agent ANT balance get too high, and/or 
- Make the Min. Approval threshold for Agent proposals lower than the Min. Approval threshold for other proposals so that if there is excess ANT in the Agent app, tokenholders can approve a proposal to disperse the ANT to accounts that are allowed to vote.

> 5. Proposals to amend either the current Aragon Court Controller contract or any new Controller contract that may be proposed for Aragon Court MUST NOT amend Aragon Court configurations, funds, and modules governors to be any entity other than an Agent app installed on the Aragon Network organization.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If the Aragon Network suffers a 51% attack then the attacker could change the Aragon Court governors and take control of sensitive parameters in Aragon Court. These new governors would not be subject to the Aragon Network Agreement and would thus have free reign over how to the govern Aragon Court to the detriment of jurors and court subscribers.

Solution: Make it illegal to change the Aragon Court governors to be any entity other than an Agent under the control of the Aragon Network organization.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to permanently close this attack vector on Aragon Court.

Author: Could this be immutably enforced in smart contract code rather than using the Agreement?

For any case where a guideline can be enforced by smart contract code rather than the Agreement, we should enforce the guideline with smart contract code.

> 6. If a proposal deploys a new Aragon Court Jurors Registry contract and/or amends Aragon Court to use a new Jurors Registry, then the new Jurors Registry MUST use ANJ as the native juror token.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If the Aragon Network suffers a 51% attack then the attacker could propose adopting a new Jurors Registry that uses a token other than ANJ as the native juror token. This other token could be a token under the exclusive control of the attacker, which would put the attacker in control of ruling on Aragon Court cases from that point on, to the detriment of jurors and Aragon Court subscribers.

Solution: Make it illegal to change the native juror token of Aragon Court to be any token other than ANJ.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to permanently close this attack vector on Aragon Court.

> 7. Proposals MUST NOT activate in Aragon Court any ANJ controlled by the Aragon Network.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: Allowing the Aragon Network to be a juror in Aragon Court could upset the balance of power intended between Aragon Court (judicial) and Aragon Network (legislative).

Solution: Make it illegal for the Aragon Network to activate any ANJ in Aragon Court.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to permanently maintain the balance of power between Aragon Court and the Aragon Network.

> 8. Proposals MUST NOT use the Aragon Network organization’s role as Aragon Court funds governor to transfer ANJ staked and/or activated by Aragon Court jurors to another Ethereum account.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: When the Aragon Network organization takes over the role of Aragon Court funds governor it will have the ability to transfer tokens held in the contracts of the court. While this capability can be used innocently to recover funds trapped in Aragon Court contracts, this also opens up jurors to theft by the Aragon Network organization.

Solution: Make it illegal for the Aragon Network organization to transfer any ANJ staked or activated in Aragon Court by Aragon Court jurors.

Immutability: The reason for making this guideline immutable is to permanently protect Aragon Court jurors from theft by the Aragon Network organization.

> ## Section 3. Mutable guidelines

Author: One idea for an additional guideline here, making note of before we finalize the Agreement text: we may want to require that any content/software funded by the Aragon Network be licensed with a permissive license (public domain or copyleft). We had this requirement in AGP-1 and it's one that makes sense to carry over here too.

> ## Section 3. Mutable guidelines

Author: Another idea for a guideline here: Proposals should be focused on one discrete deliverable at a time. This way proposals aren't bundling unrelated/unnecessary deliverables together e.g. "Proposal to fund development of this awesome new feature that everyone really wants and ALSO a pony for everyone on the dev team!" In this example funding for the development of the feature is a necessary component of the deliverable, while ponies for the dev team are, arguably, not necessary to deliver the feature.

The guidelines in this section MAY be amended. These guidelines apply to all proposals put forth to the Aragon Network organization.

> 1. Proposals MUST be consistent with the Aragon Manifesto.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: Majority tokenholders might try to push through proposals that are counter to the values and mission of the organization.

Solution: Encode the mission and values of the Aragon Network in a Manifesto. Require proposals to be consistent with the Manifesto.

> 1. Proposals MUST be consistent with the Aragon Manifesto.

Author: The reason for not making this guideline immutable is that we may want flexibility for the Aragon Manifesto to be amended, and if the Manifesto can be amended then there's no reason to make this guideline immutable.

A catch-22 here is that by allowing the Manifesto to be amended we potentially provide an avenue for attackers to render it useless as a defense mechanism. An attacker would first pass a proposal to amend the Manifesto just enough to allow for their attack to succeed, and then to launch their attack. A crucial question to ask is whether a proposal to amend the Manifesto in this manner would be consistent with either the existing Manifesto or the rest of the Agreement; if so then their attack would succeed, but if not then the Network will be successfully defended.

The most relevant question for this guideline then is whether we actually want to allow the Manifesto to be amended. We could close the above mentioned attack vector by making this guideline immutable and adding another immutable guideline that says the Manifesto cannot be amended. Then we have to make sure that the Manifesto approved by ANT holders in the final vote is definitely the one we want, as it may not be possible to migrate assets under the control of the Network to another organization with a new Agreement/Manifesto once this Agreement/Manifesto is adopted.

Reviewer 2: I think the Manifesto must be immutable. If someone wants to change it, they can launch their own fork of the Aragon Network.

Reviewer: I think it should be possible to change the Manifesto. That doesn't mean it should be easy or happen often, and I don't expect anyone wanting to change it any time soon. But I do think it should be possible.

Reviewer 2: >I think it should be possible to change the Manifesto. That doesn't mean it should be easy or happen often, and I don't expect anyone wanting to change it any time soon. But I do think it should be possible.

Why should it be possible?

The Manifesto states the values of the Aragon community. If someone disagrees with these values, for example if they think that centralized control and surveillance is good, then they should go and create their own community instead of trying to capture Aragon Network.

Reviewer: I think it should not be immutable for the same reason constitutions are not immutable - it gives the network constituency actual full sovereignty. I'm not sure saying "if you don't accept the (immutability of the) Manifesto, you should leave and create your own network" is the best way to go about it. I also doubt that future changes to the Manifesto will include an endorsement of surveillance. It's much more likely that the community will want to positively expand the vision and value set, or perhaps rephrase/clarify something, simply because people learn and cultures evolve.

> 2. Proposals to transfer assets from the Aragon Network organization to the exclusive control of any other entity SHALL NOT be allowed until Ethereum block #15,000,000.

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: By allowing ANT holders to spend the resources of the Network, we create an immediate incentive for competition and politicking among ANT holders for financial resources at a time when the focus should be on growing revenues and savings, not spending.

Solution: Make transferring Network assets illegal until a couple of years into the organization's life.

Reviewer 3: Thinking more about this guideline, I think it could complicate a bit the project's path to decentralization. One of the concentrated powers in Aragon right now is the economic power (which is a very strong/influential power). This power is concentrated in one entity: the Aragon Association (and whoever controls that legal entity). If the Aragon Network DAO becomes self-sustainable, with a treasury of its own, and the DAO is able to use that treasury for the development of the Aragon Network, there will be another source of funding for the Aragon Network. At this moment there could be said that the economic power in the AN DAO is decentralized and making the decentralization of the DAO more powerful. Thus, even though I understand the point of this guideline, the sooner the DAO is self-sustainable and able to spend its own treasury on the Aragon Network development, without depending solely on the Aragon Association, the better.

> 2. Proposals to transfer assets from the Aragon Network organization to the exclusive control of any other entity SHALL NOT be allowed until Ethereum block #15,000,000.

Author: Growing revenues often requires spending ― "it takes money to make money" ― but revenues may not be significant enough to move the needle much in the early days of the Network. We should let the revenues build up for a period of time and start spending only once there is a substantial treasury built up.

That said, if ANT holders want to get around this clause without voting to remove it, they can direct revenues from Aragon Court and other sources to a "splitter" contract that would send some or all of the rewards to a separate organization (e.g. CFDAO) that they can then use to freely spend the funds. I think it is reasonable to allow this if ANT holders decide to start experimenting with participatory budgeting sooner rather than later.

> 3. Proposals MUST be accompanied by an accurate American English-language Justification for the proposal. Typos in the Justification SHALL be allowed if they do not substantially alter the meaning of the proposal. Each Justification MUST be referred to in the on-chain source code or transaction data of the proposal by the content-addressed location of the Justification on the public IPFS network, and the Justification MUST be accessible via the public IPFS network for as long as the proposal is open for voting and/or in effect. If a Justification becomes temporarily inaccessible via the public IPFS network, and its proposal is challenged under this guideline, then jurors SHOULD block the proposal if they have reason to believe the Justification was inaccessible at the time that the proposal was challenged. Alternatively, the Justification MAY be encoded directly into the on-chain source code or transaction data of the proposal so that the Justification remains human-readable and accessible as long as the Ethereum blockchain itself remains publicly available. The Justification MUST include the following information:

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: People might try to sneak through proposals by misrepresenting what they do vs what they will actually do.

Solution: Require that proposals include a full, accurate description of what the proposal will do. Require that the Justification remain accessible so that the proposal can be properly evaluated. If the Justification is inaccurate, then the proposal can be blocked by Aragon Court.

Reviewer: Is there a specific reason for forcing people to use IPFS instead of simply requiring that the proposal be kept publicly accessible?

Author: I think the file will be more likely to stay online if it's hosted on a network that supports multiple seeders, and since Aragon uses IPFS for a number of other purposes already it is a natural fit.

Reviewer: Distributed/redundant storage preferred, no doubt. I just started wondering whether something could be said here about lock-in, optionality, flexibility. If there's a technical reason why it has to be IPFS then, of course, it makes sense.

Reviewer 2: @mlphresearch 

IPFS is a content-addressable storage, so the proposal can not be changed without changing its URL. If there are other storage networks that have this property, I think they can be allowed as well.

Author: @xuhcc that is another nice property, yes. Also it was pointed out that the Aragon Court Dashboard uses IPFS to fetch the Justification, which is displayed as the first argument for a proposal. So having the requirement that the Justification be uploaded to and available via IPFS makes sense so it can be easily consumed by the Court Dashboard.

    - The name(s) and/or username(s) of the author(s) of the proposal. The author(s) SHOULD be the primary point of contact for any questions or comments regarding the proposal.
    - The author’s preferred contact method, in case anyone has questions or comments regarding the proposal.
    - An accurate summary of the proposal in 280 characters or less.
    - A rationale section detailing the author’s reason(s) for creating the proposal.
    - An accurate, long-form description of what the proposal will do if enacted.

>     - A section acknowledging by title and author(s) any similar or related prior work known to the proposal author(s).

Author: ```suggestion
    - If applicable, a section acknowledging by title and author(s) any similar or related prior work known to the proposal author(s).
```

    - If the proposal amends one or more Network contracts, then a security audit report of the Network contract amendment MUST be included in the Justification. This security audit report MUST be produced by a third-party security auditor and remain publicly accessible for as long as the amendment is in effect. The third-party security auditor MUST NOT have any financial relationship to the proposal author(s) aside from their being hired to perform the security audit.

> 4. Proposal Justifications MUST NOT contain directly or by direct link any Non-consensual Imagery (NCI), Child Abuse Imagery (CAI), malware, spyware, or material that is owned via Copyright by someone other than one of the proposal authors (unless use of said Copyright material is permitted by the Copyright owner or otherwise protected under Fair Use standards).

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: Since ANT is a publicly listed asset, pretty much anyone will be able to create a proposal. For someone who wants to hurt the Aragon Network, they could create a proposal with a Justification that contains or links to content that may be harmful to reviewers.

Solution: Make it illegal to include certain kinds of harmful content in the Justification. This does not eliminate the possibility of harmful content to be uploaded but will impose a cost to doing so (either the cost of the proposal collateral, which will be slashed when Aragon Court blocks the illegal proposal, or the settlement cost if someone offers a settlement).

## Section 4. Definitions
Any words or phrases not explicitly defined here SHALL be defined by either the Merriam-Webster Dictionary (https://www.merriam-webster.com/) or the Merriam-Webster Law Dictionary (https://www.merriam-webster.com/legal). In cases where a word or phrase appears in both the Dictionary and Law Dictionary, the Law Dictionary definition SHALL be used by the reader. In cases where a word or phrase is not explicitly defined here or in either of the dictionaries specified above, the definition most reasonable to the reader MAY be used.

> **Agent app** - An Aragon app that enables members of an Aragon organization to interact with other smart contracts on behalf of the organization, as if it were the organization itself performing the interaction. The proxy contracts for the Aragon apps installed on the Aragon Network organization are deployed at the Ethereum addresses `TBD`.

Author: > `TBD`

These Agent addresses will be added in once the new Aragon Network organization is deployed.

**Aragon Court** - A smart contract-based dispute resolution system governed by ANT holders.

**Aragon Manifesto** - A founding document in the Aragon Network, the canonical version of which can be found in the Appendix of this Agreement.

**Aragon Network** - all smart contracts on the Ethereum blockchain that are governed directly or indirectly by ANT holders, and are also subject to this Agreement.

**Aragon Network Agreement** - The whole of this document (“this Agreement”), which consists of the human-interpreted rules of the Aragon Network.

> **Aragon Network organization** - the Aragon organization addressed by the ENS name `network.aragonid.eth`, encompassing all apps installed on this organization.

Author: > `network.aragonid.eth`

This ENS name may change once new Aragon Network organization is deployed.

**Ethereum blockchain** - The blockchain referred to as “Ethereum” by the owner of the Ethereum trademark, the Ethereum Foundation (Stiftung Ethereum).

**IPFS network** - A peer-to-peer hypermedia protocol, whose project website is located at https://ipfs.io. The public network makes files accessible to any internet-connected device running a compatible implementation of the IPFS software.

**Network contract** - The computer-interpreted source code of a smart contract governed by ANT holders.

**Network parameters** - The current parameters of smart contracts governed by ANT holders, which can be modified without amending the source code of the smart contract itself.

**Proposal** - A proposal is any suggested amendment to the Network contracts, Network parameters, or the Agreement of the Aragon Network.

**RFC 2119** - A technical standard for indicating requirement levels, the canonical version of which is located at https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119.

**Smart contract** - a software program deployed to the Ethereum blockchain.

> ## Appendix. The Aragon Manifesto

Author: **Annotation**
Problem: If we aren't explicit about what the mission and values of the Aragon Network are, proposals could be off-topic and/or in conflict with the values shared by ANT holders.

Solution: Enumerate our shared mission and values to keep proposals focused and values-aligned.
